				Bash and Bash Scripting


shell types

1) sh or bourne shell
2) bash ( bourne again shell)
3)csh (c shell)
4) tcsh (TENEX c shell)
5) ksh (korn shell) 

The file /etc/shells gives an overview of known shells on linux system

your defualt shell is set in the /etc/passws file 

To switch from one shell to another just enter the name of the new shell in the active terminal 





					Writing and Debugging script

A shell is a sequence of commands for which you have a repeated use. This sequence is typically executed by entering the name of the script on the command line. Alternatively we can use scripts to automate tasks using the cron facility 


To create a shell script open a new empty file in yout editory . any text editor will do :vim emacs gedit dtpad et cetera are all valid 

syntax highlighting in vim 

in order rto activate syntax highlighting in vim use the command 
:syntax enable or :sy enable or :syn enable

you can add this setting to your .vimrc file to make it permanent

Give your script a sensible name that gives a hint about what the script does make sure that your script name does not confilct wit existing commands in order to ensure that no confusion can rise script names often end in .sh even so there might be other scripts on your system with the same name as the one you chose check using whereis and which and otehr commands for finiding information about program and files 

which -a script_name
whereis script_name
locate script_name


Executing the script 

The script should have execute permissions for the correct owners in order to be runnable when permissions check that you really obtained the permission that you want when this is done the script can run like any other command

chmod u+x script.sh

script.sh

this is the most common way to eecute a script it is preferred to execute the script like this in a subshell. the variable functions and aliases created in this subshell are only known to the particular bash session of that subshell when that shell exits and the parent regains control everyting is cleaned up and all changes to the state of the shell made by the script are forgotten 

If the cscripts directory is not in the path and . (the current directory) is not the PATH either yoy can activate the script like this 

./scripth.sh

A script can also explicitly be executed by a given shell but generally we only do this if we want to obtain special behavior such as checking if the script works with another shell or printing traces for debugging 

rbash script.sh
sh script.sh
bash -x script.sh

The specified shell will start as subshell of your current shell and execute the script. this is done when you want the script to start up with specific option or under specific conditions which are not specified in the script


Which shell will the script work

When running a script in a subshell you should define which shell should run the script the shell type in which you wrote the script might not be the default on your system so command yoy entered might result to errors when executed by wrong shell

The first line of the script deternines the shell to start the first two characters of the firest line should be #! then follows the path to the shell that should interpret the command that follow.Blank lines are also considered to be line so dont start your script with an empty line

#!/bin/bash

Comments 

in bash we represent comments with # comments can be written above or below the script and at the end of any command


# this line in script will be considered as comment which will not affect the code and wont be displayed in output but will be their in source code

					Debugging Bash Script 

When things dont go according to plan you need to determine what exactly causes the script to fail bash provides extensive features the most common is to start up the subshell with the -x option which will run the entire script in debug mode Traces of each command plus its arguments are printed to standard output after the commands have been expanded but before they are executed 


bash -x script.sh

Debugging on parts of the script 

using the set Basg built-in you can run in normal mode those portions of the script of which you are sure they are without fault and display debugging information only for troublesome ones say we are not sure what the w command will do in the example then we could enclose it in the script 

set -x
w
set +x

				
				The Bash Environment (37)

/etc/profile

when invoked interactively with the --login option or when invoked as sh Bash reads the /etc/profile instructions these usually set the shell variables PATH , USER, MAIL, HOSTNAME and  HISTSIZE	

on some system the umask value is configured in /etc/profile on other system this file holds pointers to configuration file such as 

.) /etc/inputrc  the system-wide readline initialization file where you can configure the command-line bell-style
.) the /etc/profile.d  directory which contains files configuring system-wide behavior of specific program


/etc/bashrc

on systems offering multiple types of shells it might be better to put bash -specific configurations in this file since /etc/profile is also read by other shells such as bourne shell errors generated by shells that  dont understand the bash syntax are prevented by splitting the configuration filess for the different type of shells in such cases the users ~/.bashrc might point to /etc/bashrc in order to include it in the shells initialization process upton login

					Variables

Types of variables 

Bash Keeps a list of two type of variables

Global variables
Global variables or environment variables are available in all shells. The env or Printenv commands can be used to display environmet variables 

Locak variables
locak variables are only available in the current shell using the set built-in command without any option will display a list of all varialbes (including environment variables) and functions. The output will be sorted according to the current local and displayed in reusable format

Variable by content 

Apart from dividing varialbes in local and global variables we can also divide them categories according to the sort of content the variable contains , variables comes in 4 types

1) string variables
2) integer variables
3) constant variables
4) array variables

Creating varaibles

Variables are case senstive and capitalized by default Giving locak variables a lowecase name is a convention which is sometimes applied However we are freee to use the names we want or mix cases. variables can also contain digits byt a name starting with a digit is not allowed 

				Exporting variables

A variable is only availabe to the current shell . it is a local variable child processes of the current shell will not be aware of this variable in order to pass varialbes to a subshell we need to export them using export built-in command. variables that are exported are referred to as environment variables. setting and exporting is usually done in one step 

export VARNAME= "value"

a subshell can change variable it inherited form the parent but the changes made by the child dont affect the parent 

					Reserved variables

Bash use certain shell variables in the same way as the bourne shell. In some cases Bash assigns a default value to the variable.

Variable
name							Definition
CDPATH 							A colon-separated list of directories used as a search path for the cd built-in command.
HOME 							The current user's home directory; the default for the cd built-in. The value of this variable is also used by tilde expansion.
IFS 							A list of characters that separate fields; used when the shell splits words as part of expansion.
MAIL 							If this parameter is set to a file name and the MAILPATH variable is not set, Bash informs the user of the arrival of mail in the specif							ied file.
MAILPATH 						A colon-separated list of file names which the shell periodically checks for new mail.
OPTARG 							The value of the last option argument processed by the getopts built-in.
OPTIND 							The index of the last option argument processed by the getopts built-in.
PATH 							A colon-separated list of directories in which the shell looks for commands.
PS1 							The primary prompt string. The default value is "'\s-\v\$ '".
PS2 							The secondary prompt string. The default value is "'> '



					Special Parameters

The shell treats several paramters specially. Theses parameters may only be referenced assignment to them is not allowed 

Character Definition
$* 	  Expands to the positional parameters, starting from one. When the expansion occurs within double quotes, it expands to a single word with the value of each parameter separated by the 	  first character of the IFS special variable.
$@ 	  Expands to the positional parameters, starting from one. When the expansion occurs within double quotes, each parameter expands to a separate word.
$# 	  Expands to the number of positional parameters in decimal.
$? 	  Expands to the exit status of the most recently executed foreground pipeline.
$- 	  A hyphen expands to the current option flags as specified upon invocation, by the set built-in command, or those set by the shell itself (such as the -i).
$$ 	  Expands to the process ID of the shell.
$! 	  Expands to the process ID of the most recently executed background (asynchronous) command.
$0 	  Expands to the name of the shell or shell script.
$_ 	  The underscore variable is set at shell startup and contains the absolute file name of the shell orscript being executed as passed in the argument list. Subsequently, it expands to t	  he last argument to the previous command, after expansion. It is also set to the full pathname of each command executed and placed in the environment exported to that command. When 
	  checking mail, this parameter holds the name of the mail file


					Script  recycling with variables

Apart from making the script more readable variables will also enable you to faster apply a script in another environment or for another purpose

First of all more likely to make errors if we name filews and directories manually each timeas they are required secondly if franky wants to give a script to carol then carol will have to quite some editing before she can use the script to back up her home directory. the same is true if franky wants to use this script for backing up other dirctories for easy recycling makes all files directories usernames servernames eltcetera variable. thus you can only need to edit a value once withour having to go through the entire script to check where a parameter occurs

					Quoting characters

A lot of keys have special meanings in some context or other quoting is used to remove the special meaning of characteres or words quotes can disable special treatment for special characters they can prevent reserved words from being recongnized as such and they can disable parameter expansion 


					Escape characters

Escape characters are used to remove the special meaning from a single character. A non-quoted baskslash , \ , is used as an escape character in Bash. It preserves the literal value of the next character that follows with the exception of newline. If a newline character apperars immediately the backslash it marks the continuation of a line when it is longer that the width of terminal  the backslash is removed from the input stream and effectively ignored 

example : date = 20260702
	  echo $date 
	  20260702
	  echo \$date
	  $date


Single quotes

single quotes ('') are used to preserve the literal value of each character enclosed within the quotes . A dingle quote may not occur between single quotes, even when preceded by a backslash

echo 'date'

Double quotes

using double quotes the literal value of all characters enclosed is preserved, except for the dollar sign the backticks (backward single quotes, ``) and the backslash

The dollar sign and tghe backticks retain their special meaning within double quotes

				ANSI-C quoting

words in the form "$'STRING'" are treated in special way. the wordexpands to a string with baskslash-escaped characters replaced as specified by the ANSI-C standard. Backslash escape sequances can be found in the Bash documentataion 

				Locales

A double-quoted string precedded by a dollar sign will cause the string to be translated according to the current locale. If the current locale is "C" or "POSIX" the dollar sign is ignored if the string is translated and replaced the replacement is double-quote

 				Refular expression

A regular expression is a pattern that describes a set of strings. Regulare expressions are constructed analogously to arithmetic expressions by using various operators to combine smaller expressions

operator	effect
.		Matches any single character
?		The preceding item is optional and will be matched at most once
*		The preceding item will be matched zero or more times
- 		represents the range if its not first or last in a list or the ending point
of a range in a list
^		matches the empty string at the beginning of a line also represents the characteres not in the range of list
$		Matches the empty string at the end of a line
\<		Matches the empty string at the beginning of word
\> 		Match the empty string at the end of word

				Basic versus extended regular expressions

In basic regular expressions the metacharacters "?","+","{","|","(",and ")" lose their special meaning instead use the backlashed versions "\?","\+","\{","\|",and "\}".

					grep

grep searches the input files for lines containing a match to a given list when it finds a match in a line it copies the line to standard output (by default) or whatever other sort output have requersted with option


					Character classes

A baradcket expression is a list of characters enclosed by "[" and "]" it matches any single character in that list if the first character of the list is the caret "^" then it matches any character Not in list i


					wildcards

use the '." for a single character match . if you want to giet a list of all five character english dictionary words starting with "c" and ending with "h"? 

ex : grep '\<c..h\>' /usr/share/dict/words

if you want to fine literal * in the file or output we can use single quote ('') 
ex : greap '*' /etc/profile

					pattern matchng using Bash features

character ranges

Apart from grep and regular expression theres a good deal of pattern matching that you can directly in the shell without having to use external program 

the asterisk (*) and the question mark  (?)  match any string or any single character respectively. Quotes these special characters to match them literally 

we can also use square braces to match any enclosed character or range of characters if parirs of characters are separated by hyphen 

ex : ls -ld [a-cx-z]*

if the first character withing the braces is "!" or "^" any character not enclosed will be macthed . To match the dash ("-") include as the first as the first or last character is the set. The sorting depends on the current locales and of the value of the LC_COLLATE variable if it is set . mind that other locales might interpret "[a-cx-z]" as "[aBbCcXxYyZz']" if sorting is done in dictionary order if you want to be sure have traditional interpretration of range force this behaviour by setting LC_COLLATE or LC_ALL to "C"


						SED

A Stream EDitior is used to perform basic transformation on text read from a file or a pipe.The result is sent to standard output . The syntax for sed command has no output file specification but result can be saved to a file using output redirection the editor does not modify the original input

What distinguishes sed from other editors such as im and ed is its ability to filter text that it getsfrom a pipeline feed you do not need to interact with the editor while it is running that is why sed is sometimes called a batch editor. This feature allows use of editing commands in scripts greatly easing repetitive editing tasks. when facing replacement of text in large number of files sed is gret help


sed commands 

The sed program can perform text pattern substitution and deletions using regular expression like the onces used with the grep commands 

command		result

a\ 		append test below current line

c\		change text in the current line with new text

d		Delete text

i\ 		Insert text above current line

p		print text

r 		read a file

s		Search and replace text

w		Write to a file


Printing lines containing a pattern

This is something we can do with grep too but grep is just used to copy the result in ouput and we cant use find and replace using grep 

if we want to find all the lines containing out search pattern in this case "errors" .  we use the p to obtain the result 

ex: sed '/erors/p' example

in this example sed prints the entire file bu the line containing the search string are printed twice This is not what we want , in order to print those line matching pattern we can use -n pattern

sed -n '/errors/p' example

Deleting lines of input containing a pattern

we cab also delete the pattern useing sed 

ex : sed '/errors/d' example

The d command results in excluding line from being displayed 

matching lines starting with a given pattern and ending in a second pattern are showed like 

sed -n '/^this.*errors.$/p' example



Range of lines

this time we want to take out the lines containing gthe errors . in the example these are line 2 to 4 sepcify this range to address together with the d command 

ex : sed '2,4d' example

to print the file starting from a cerain line until the end of the file use a command like 

ex : sed '3,$d' example

Find and replace with sed

we can use sed to search and replace the errors instead of only (de)selecting the line contiainging the search string

sed /s/erors/errors/' example

this method is used to replace the first occurance in the line to change all the occurance in the line we can use g command to indicate to sed that it should examine the entire line instead of stopping at the first occur

sed '/s/erors/errors/g' example

to insert a string at the beginning of each line of a file 

sed 's/^/>' example

insert some string at the end of each line

sed 's/$/EOL/' example

multiple find and replace commands are seprated with individual -e option

sed -e 's/erors/errors/g' -e 's/last/final/g' example




					awk (gawk)

The basic function of awk is to search files for lines or other text units containing one or more pattern. when a line matches one of the patterns, special actions are performed on the line.

programs in awk are different from programs in most other languages because awk programs are "data-driven" you describe the data you want to work with and then what to do when you find it . most other language are "procedural." you have to describe in great detail every step the program is to take when working with procedural languages it is usually much harder to clearly describe the data your program will process . for this reason awk program are often refreshingly easy to read and write 


When we run awk we specify an awk program that tells awk what to do . the program consist of series of rules . each rules specifies one pattern to search for and  one action to performupon finding the pattern

The print command and regular expressions
A regular expression can be used as a pattern by enclosing it in slashes. The regular expression is then tested against the entire text of each record the syntax is as follows

awk 'EXPRESSION' {PROGRAM}' file(s)

df -h | aws '/dev\/hd/' {print $6 "\t:" $5}'

slashes need to escaped because they have special meaning to the awk program 

in awk /< is used to match the start of the line and $/ is used to match the end of the line


					Conditional statement


conditional statement are needed to specify different courses of acton to be taken in a shell script. depending on the sucess or failure of a command .  The if construction allows to sepcify such conditions

the most compact syntax of the if command is 

if TEST-COMMANDS; then CONSEQUENT-COMMAND; fi

The TEST-COMMAND list is executed and if it return status is zero the CONSEQUENT-COMMANDS list executed. The return status is the exit status of the last command executed or zero if no condition tested true

The consequent-command list that follows the then statment can be any valid unix command any executable program any executable shell script or any shell statement with the exception of the closing fi. it is important to remember that the then and fi are considered to be separated statements in the shell therefore when issued on the command line they are seperated by a semi-colon




					Expressions used with if

primary			meaning

[-a FILE]		True if FILE exists

[-b FILE]		True if FILE exists and is a block-special file

[-c FILE]	 	True if FILE exists and is a characters-special file

[-e FILE]		True if FILE exists

[-d FILE]		True if FILE exists and is a directory

[-f FILE]		True  if FILE exists and is a regular file


Commands following the then statement

The CONSEQUENT-COMMANDS list that follows the then statement can be any valid UNIX command any executable program any executable shell script or any shell statement with the exception of the closing fi.

example 
if [-f /var/log/messages]
	then
	  echo "/var/log/messages exists."
fi


				if/then/else

this is the construct to use to take one course of action if the if commands test true and another if it test fase 

					[] VS [[]]

contrary to [ , [[ prevents word splitting of variable values so if var="var with spaces" you do not need to double quote $var in a test - eventhough using quotes remains a good habit [[ prevents pathname expansion so literal string with wildcards so not try to expand to filenames using [[, == and != interptet strings to the right as shell glob patterns to be matched against the value to the left for instance [[ "value" == val* ]].


					if/then/elif/else 

this id the full form of the if statement

if TEST-COMMANDS;then
CONSQUENT-COMMANDS;	
elif MORE-TEST-COMMANDS;then
MORE-CONSQUENT-COMMANDS;
else ALTERNATE-CONSQUENT-COMMANDS;
fi

					Nested if statement

Inside the if statement you can use another if statement you may use as many levels of nested ifs as you logiaclly manage 



